docs/run-ledger-schema.md, before:

# Run ledger database schema

When `OLO_RUN_LEDGER=true`, the worker persists run and node records to the database. Table names use the `olo_` prefix. Schema supports AI cost tracking (MODEL/PLANNER nodes), execution replay metadata, run-level aggregations, and production indexing.

**Bootstrap:** The worker runs the schema SQL at startup so tables and indexes are created if they do not exist. The script is `olo-run-ledger/src/main/resources/schema/olo-ledger.sql` (classpath resource `schema/olo-ledger.sql`). It is executed once by `JdbcLedgerStore.ensureSchema()` when the ledger is enabled.

## PostgreSQL (current schema)

The canonical schema is in **`olo-run-ledger/src/main/resources/schema/olo-ledger.sql`**. Summary:

- **olo_run** — One row per execution run. **run_id** (UUID PK), **tenant_id** (UUID NOT NULL), pipeline, input_json (JSONB), **start_time** / **end_time** (TIMESTAMPTZ), status, total_nodes, total_cost, total_tokens, duration_ms, error_message, failure_stage, total_prompt_tokens, total_completion_tokens, currency. Config snapshot fields (config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions) are **not** on olo_run; they live in **olo_config** only.
- **olo_run_node** — One row per node execution. **run_id** (UUID), **tenant_id** (UUID, nullable for backward compat when not provided), **node_id** (UUID), node_type, input_snapshot/output_snapshot (JSONB), start_time/end_time (TIMESTAMPTZ), status, error_code, error_message, error_details (JSONB), token/cost columns, model_name, provider, replay columns (prompt_hash, model_config_json, tool_calls_json, temperature, top_p, provider_request_id), retry columns (retry_count, attempt, max_attempts, backoff_ms), execution_stage, failure_type, **parent_node_id** (UUID), execution_order, depth. PK (run_id, node_id); FK run_id → olo_run ON DELETE CASCADE.
- **olo_config** — Immutable config snapshot per run. **run_id** (UUID PK, FK → olo_run), **tenant_id** (UUID NOT NULL), pipeline, config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions, created_at (TIMESTAMPTZ). Written once at run start by `JdbcLedgerStore.configRecorded()` (called from `runStarted()`).

**Indexes:** idx_olo_run_tenant_start, idx_olo_run_tenant_pipeline_start, idx_olo_run_status, idx_olo_run_pipeline; idx_olo_run_node_run, idx_olo_run_node_tenant, idx_olo_run_node_status, idx_olo_run_node_type, idx_olo_run_node_parent; idx_olo_config_tenant_pipeline.

**Java:** `JdbcLedgerStore` binds UUID columns via `setObject(..., parseUuid(...))`; null/blank tenant or parent_node_id are bound as null where the schema allows.

## Migrations from previous schema

If you already have `olo_run` / `olo_run_node` with VARCHAR or missing columns/tables:

```sql
-- Add olo_config if missing (config snapshot per run)
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS olo_config (
    run_id                  UUID PRIMARY KEY,
    tenant_id               UUID NOT NULL,
    pipeline                VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    config_version          VARCHAR(64),
    snapshot_version_id     VARCHAR(64),
    plugin_versions         TEXT,
    created_at              TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE
);
CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_olo_config_tenant_pipeline ON olo_config(tenant_id, pipeline);

-- Add new columns to olo_run (if not present)
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_message TEXT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS failure_stage VARCHAR(128);
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_prompt_tokens INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_completion_tokens INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS currency VARCHAR(8) DEFAULT 'USD';

-- Add new columns to olo_run_node (if not present)
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_code VARCHAR(64);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_details JSONB;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS prompt_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS completion_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS temperature DECIMAL(5,4);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS top_p DECIMAL(5,4);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS provider_request_id VARCHAR(255);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS attempt INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS max_attempts INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS backoff_ms BIGINT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS execution_stage VARCHAR(64);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS failure_type VARCHAR(128);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS parent_node_id UUID;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS execution_order INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS depth INT;
CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_olo_run_node_parent ON olo_run_node(parent_node_id);
```

**Migrating existing VARCHAR IDs to UUID** (only if current columns are varchar/text):

```sql
-- Drop FKs that reference run_id before altering
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS olo_run_node_run_id_fkey;
ALTER TABLE olo_config DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS olo_config_run_id_fkey;
-- Convert columns
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING tenant_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING NULLIF(trim(tenant_id), '')::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN node_id TYPE UUID USING node_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN parent_node_id TYPE UUID USING NULLIF(trim(parent_node_id), '')::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING tenant_id::uuid;
-- Re-add FKs
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD CONSTRAINT olo_run_node_run_id_fkey FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ADD CONSTRAINT olo_config_run_id_fkey FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE;
```

**Migrating timestamps to TIMESTAMPTZ** (if currently without time zone):

```sql
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN start_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING start_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN end_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING end_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN start_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING start_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN end_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING end_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN created_at TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING created_at AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
```

## Partitioning (future-proofing)

For high volume, partition by time to avoid table bloat and vacuum pressure:

```sql
-- Example: monthly range partitioning (PostgreSQL 10+)
-- CREATE TABLE olo_run (...) PARTITION BY RANGE (start_time);
-- CREATE TABLE olo_run_2026_02 PARTITION OF olo_run FOR VALUES FROM ('2026-02-01') TO ('2026-03-01');
```

## Environment

- `OLO_RUN_LEDGER` — set to `true` to enable run ledger.
- `OLO_DB_HOST`, `OLO_DB_PORT`, `OLO_DB_NAME`, `OLO_DB_USER`, `OLO_DB_PASSWORD` — ledger DB connection.

## Audit persistence of plugin version

**olo_config.plugin_versions** is the **audit record** of which plugin versions were in use for the run. It is written once at run start when the ledger records the config snapshot and is **immutable** for the life of the run.

- **Format**: JSON object (TEXT). Keys = plugin ids (every `pluginRef` used in the execution tree for that run); values = contract version from the registry (e.g. `"1.0"`) or `"?"` if unknown. Example: `{"GPT4_EXECUTOR":"1.0","QDRANT_VECTOR_STORE":"1.0"}`.
- **Source**: Built at run start by collecting all plugin refs from the pipeline’s execution tree and resolving each via `PluginRegistry.getContractVersion(tenantId, pluginId)`. Stored in **olo_config** only (not on olo_run or olo_run_node).
- **Use**: Audit and compliance (which plugin versions ran), debugging, and compatibility analysis. Query by run_id via olo_config to see the exact plugin versions for that run.

## Design

- **AI cost**: MODEL/PLANNER nodes get token_input_count, token_output_count, estimated_cost, prompt_cost, completion_cost, total_cost, model_name, provider from plugin output.
- **Run aggregations**: total_nodes, total_cost, total_tokens, duration_ms, error_message, failure_stage, total_prompt_tokens, total_completion_tokens, currency set on run end.
- **Config snapshot**: Stored only in olo_config (run_id, tenant_id, pipeline, config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions); no duplication on olo_run.
- **Replay**: prompt_hash, model_config_json, tool_calls_json, external_payload_ref, temperature, top_p, provider_request_id support deterministic replay.
- **Failure intelligence**: error_code, error_message, error_details, retry_count, attempt, max_attempts, backoff_ms, execution_stage, failure_type for reliability analytics.
- **Hierarchy**: parent_node_id, execution_order, depth for tree reconstruction.

Commit message:

feat(planner): add iterative planner execution support
- Introduce iterative planner contract with continue + nextStep model
- Enable planner-driven loop execution in workflow layer
- Add max-iteration guard for safety
- Maintain backward compatibility with static dynamicSteps flow
- Preserve one-activity-per-step execution model

docs/run-ledger-schema.md, after:

# Run ledger database schema

When `OLO_RUN_LEDGER=true`, the worker persists run and node records to the database. Table names use the `olo_` prefix. Schema supports AI cost tracking (MODEL/PLANNER nodes), execution replay metadata, run-level aggregations, and production indexing.

**Bootstrap:** The worker runs the schema SQL at startup so tables and indexes are created if they do not exist. The script is `olo-run-ledger/src/main/resources/schema/olo-ledger.sql` (classpath resource `schema/olo-ledger.sql`). It is executed once by `JdbcLedgerStore.ensureSchema()` when the ledger is enabled.

## PostgreSQL (current schema)

The canonical schema is in **`olo-run-ledger/src/main/resources/schema/olo-ledger.sql`**. Summary:

- **olo_run** — One row per execution run. **run_id** (UUID PK), **tenant_id** (UUID NOT NULL), pipeline, input_json (JSONB), **start_time** / **end_time** (TIMESTAMPTZ), status, total_nodes, total_cost, total_tokens, duration_ms, error_message, failure_stage, total_prompt_tokens, total_completion_tokens, currency. Config snapshot fields (config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions) are **not** on olo_run; they live in **olo_config** only.
- **olo_run_node** — One row per node **attempt**. **run_id** (UUID), **tenant_id** (UUID, nullable for backward compat when not provided), **node_id** (UUID), node_type, input_snapshot/output_snapshot (JSONB), start_time/end_time (TIMESTAMPTZ), status, error_code, error_message, error_details (JSONB), token/cost columns, model_name, provider, replay columns (prompt_hash, model_config_json, tool_calls_json, temperature, top_p, provider_request_id), retry columns (retry_count, attempt, max_attempts, backoff_ms), execution_stage, failure_type, **parent_node_id** (UUID), execution_order, depth. **Ledger is append-only:** each attempt is a separate row. Uniqueness: **(run_id, node_id, attempt)** when attempt is part of the key; current schema PK (run_id, node_id) allows one row per node per run until migration adds attempt to the key. FK run_id → olo_run ON DELETE CASCADE.
- **olo_config** — Immutable config snapshot per run. **run_id** (UUID PK, FK → olo_run), **tenant_id** (UUID NOT NULL), pipeline, config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions, created_at (TIMESTAMPTZ). Written once at run start by `JdbcLedgerStore.configRecorded()` (called from `runStarted()`).

**Indexes:** idx_olo_run_tenant_start, idx_olo_run_tenant_pipeline_start, idx_olo_run_status, idx_olo_run_pipeline; idx_olo_run_node_run, idx_olo_run_node_tenant, idx_olo_run_node_status, idx_olo_run_node_type, idx_olo_run_node_parent; idx_olo_config_tenant_pipeline.

**Java:** `JdbcLedgerStore` binds UUID columns via `setObject(..., parseUuid(...))`; null/blank tenant or parent_node_id are bound as null where the schema allows.

## Migrations from previous schema

If you already have `olo_run` / `olo_run_node` with VARCHAR or missing columns/tables:

```sql
-- Add olo_config if missing (config snapshot per run)
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS olo_config (
    run_id                  UUID PRIMARY KEY,
    tenant_id               UUID NOT NULL,
    pipeline                VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    config_version          VARCHAR(64),
    snapshot_version_id     VARCHAR(64),
    plugin_versions         TEXT,
    created_at              TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE
);
CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_olo_config_tenant_pipeline ON olo_config(tenant_id, pipeline);

-- Add new columns to olo_run (if not present)
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_message TEXT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS failure_stage VARCHAR(128);
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_prompt_tokens INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_completion_tokens INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS currency VARCHAR(8) DEFAULT 'USD';

-- Add new columns to olo_run_node (if not present)
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_code VARCHAR(64);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS error_details JSONB;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS prompt_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS completion_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS total_cost DECIMAL(10,6);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS temperature DECIMAL(5,4);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS top_p DECIMAL(5,4);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS provider_request_id VARCHAR(255);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS attempt INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS max_attempts INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS backoff_ms BIGINT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS execution_stage VARCHAR(64);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS failure_type VARCHAR(128);
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS parent_node_id UUID;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS execution_order INT;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS depth INT;
CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_olo_run_node_parent ON olo_run_node(parent_node_id);
```

**Migrating existing VARCHAR IDs to UUID** (only if current columns are varchar/text):

```sql
-- Drop FKs that reference run_id before altering
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS olo_run_node_run_id_fkey;
ALTER TABLE olo_config DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS olo_config_run_id_fkey;
-- Convert columns
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING tenant_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING NULLIF(trim(tenant_id), '')::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN node_id TYPE UUID USING node_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN parent_node_id TYPE UUID USING NULLIF(trim(parent_node_id), '')::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN run_id TYPE UUID USING run_id::uuid;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN tenant_id TYPE UUID USING tenant_id::uuid;
-- Re-add FKs
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ADD CONSTRAINT olo_run_node_run_id_fkey FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE;
ALTER TABLE olo_config ADD CONSTRAINT olo_config_run_id_fkey FOREIGN KEY (run_id) REFERENCES olo_run(run_id) ON DELETE CASCADE;
```

**Migrating timestamps to TIMESTAMPTZ** (if currently without time zone):

```sql
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN start_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING start_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run ALTER COLUMN end_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING end_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN start_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING start_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_run_node ALTER COLUMN end_time TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING end_time AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
ALTER TABLE olo_config ALTER COLUMN created_at TYPE TIMESTAMPTZ USING created_at AT TIME ZONE 'UTC';
```

## Partitioning (future-proofing)

For high volume, partition by time to avoid table bloat and vacuum pressure:

```sql
-- Example: monthly range partitioning (PostgreSQL 10+)
-- CREATE TABLE olo_run (...) PARTITION BY RANGE (start_time);
-- CREATE TABLE olo_run_2026_02 PARTITION OF olo_run FOR VALUES FROM ('2026-02-01') TO ('2026-03-01');
```

## Environment

- `OLO_RUN_LEDGER` — set to `true` to enable run ledger.
- `OLO_DB_HOST`, `OLO_DB_PORT`, `OLO_DB_NAME`, `OLO_DB_USER`, `OLO_DB_PASSWORD` — ledger DB connection.

## Audit persistence of plugin version

**olo_config.plugin_versions** is the **audit record** of which plugin versions were in use for the run. It is written once at run start when the ledger records the config snapshot and is **immutable** for the life of the run.

- **Format**: JSON object (TEXT). Keys = plugin ids (every `pluginRef` used in the execution tree for that run); values = contract version from the registry (e.g. `"1.0"`) or `"?"` if unknown. Example: `{"GPT4_EXECUTOR":"1.0","QDRANT_VECTOR_STORE":"1.0"}`.
- **Source**: Built at run start by collecting all plugin refs from the pipeline’s execution tree and resolving each via `PluginRegistry.getContractVersion(tenantId, pluginId)`. Stored in **olo_config** only (not on olo_run or olo_run_node).
- **Use**: Audit and compliance (which plugin versions ran), debugging, and compatibility analysis. Query by run_id via olo_config to see the exact plugin versions for that run.

## Design

- **AI cost**: MODEL/PLANNER nodes get token_input_count, token_output_count, estimated_cost, prompt_cost, completion_cost, total_cost, model_name, provider from plugin output.
- **Run aggregations**: total_nodes, total_cost, total_tokens, duration_ms, error_message, failure_stage, total_prompt_tokens, total_completion_tokens, currency set on run end.
- **Config snapshot**: Stored only in olo_config (run_id, tenant_id, pipeline, config_version, snapshot_version_id, plugin_versions); no duplication on olo_run.
- **Replay**: prompt_hash, model_config_json, tool_calls_json, external_payload_ref, temperature, top_p, provider_request_id support deterministic replay.
- **Failure intelligence**: error_code, error_message, error_details, retry_count, attempt, max_attempts, backoff_ms, execution_stage, failure_type for reliability analytics.
- **Hierarchy**: parent_node_id, execution_order, depth for tree reconstruction.

## Ledger is append-only; each attempt recorded separately

The run ledger is **write-only** and **append-only**. It does not update previous rows to reflect retries.

- **Per node attempt:** When a node is retried (e.g. by a RETRY parent), **each attempt is recorded separately**. One row per `(run_id, node_id, attempt)`.
- **Uniqueness:** Uniqueness is enforced by **run_id + node_id + attempt**. The schema today uses PK `(run_id, node_id)`; to support multiple attempts per node, the primary key is extended to include **attempt** (e.g. `(run_id, node_id, attempt)`), so each attempt is a distinct row. No in-place update of a previous attempt’s row.
- **Implications:** NodeLedgerFeature (and the store) write one **INSERT** at node start and one **UPDATE** for that same row at node end, keyed by `(run_id, node_id, attempt)`. When the runtime supports retries, it passes the current attempt number so the ledger can insert a new row per attempt and update only that row on end. Until **attempt** is part of the key and the runtime passes it, nodes that are retried may only persist the last attempt’s outcome in the current schema.
